# Operating System

#### What is an operating system

The operating system is a software program that facilitates computer hardware to communicate and operate with the computer software.



#### What is a socket

A socket is used to make connection between two applications. Endpoints of connection are called socket



#### What is a real-time system

Real-time system is used in the case when rigid-time requirements have been placed on the operation of a processor. It contains a well defined and fixed time constraints



#### What is kernel

Kenerl is the core and most important part of a computer operating system which provides basic services for all parts of OS



#### What is context switching

Context switching involves storing the context of state of a process so that is can be reloaded when required and execution can be resumed form the same point as earlier



#### What is a process

An program in execution.

States:

* New process
* Running process
* Waiting process
* Ready process
* Terminated process



#### What is a thread

A thread is a segment of a process, consisting of tread ID, program counter, register set and a stack



#### Difference between process and thread

| PROCESS                                                | THREAD                                                 |
| ------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| Heavyweight                                            | Lightweight                                            |
| Takes more time to terminate, creation, context switch | Takes less time to terminate, creation, context switch |
| mostly isolated                                        | share memory                                           |
| does not share data                                    | share data with each other                             |



#### What is the use of paging in opearting system

Paging is used to solve the external fragmentation problem in operating system. This technique ensures that the data you need is available as quickly as possible. It avoids the need for contiguous allocation of physical memory. Each process is divided in the form of pages. The main memory is divided into small fixed-size blocks of physical memory, which is called frames



#### What is the concept of demand paging

Demand paging specifies if an area of memory is not being used, it will be swapped to disk to make room



#### What is fragmentation

Fragmentation is a phenomenon of memory waste

* Internal fragmentation: system has fixed size allocation units
* External fragmentation: variable-size allocation units



#### What is virtual memory

Virtaul memory enables processes execute out of memory.



#### What is thrashing

Trashing is a phnomenon in virtual memory scheme when the processor spends most of time in swapping pages, rather than execution



#### What are the four necessary and sufficient conditions behind the deadlock

1. Mutual Exclusion Condition: resources are non-sharable
2. Hold and Wait Condition: a process that is holding a resource already allocated to it while waiting for additional resource that are currently being held by other processes
3. No-preemption Condition: resouces cannot be taken away while they are being used by processes
4. Circular Wait Condition: processes in the system form a cicular list where each process is waiting for resources held by neext process



#### What is Banker's algorithm

Banker's algorithm is used to avoid Deadlock. 



#### What is FCFS

FCFS stands for First-Come, First-Serve, which a scheduling algorithm. If a process requests the CPU first, it is allocated to the CPU first. Its implementation is managed by a FIFO queue



#### What is semaphore

Semaphore is used to lock the resource being used. The value of the semaphore indicates the status of a common resource

Binary semaphonre takes only 0 and 1 as value and used to implement mutual exclusion and synchronize concurrent processes



#### What is starvation

Starvation is a resource management problem that a waiting process does not get the resource it needs for a long time because the resources are being allocated to other processes.

Use aging to avoid starvation



#### What is the difference between logical and physical address space

Logical address specified the address which is generated by the CPU, whereas physical address specifies to the address which is seen by memory unit



#### What is Round Robin 

Each process is assigned a fixed time in cycle way